.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH LINK-GRAMMAR 1 "April 23, 2006"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
grammar-parse \- parses natural language sentences
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grammar-parse
.RI [language]
[\-pp pp_knowledge_file] [\-c constituent_knowledge_file]
[\-a affix_file] [\-ppoff] [\-coff] [\-aoff] [\-batch] [\-<special "!" command>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
In Selator, D. and Temperly, D. "Parsing English with a Link Grammar"
(1991), the authors defined a new formal grammatical system called a
"link grammar". A sequence of words is in the language of a link
grammar if there is a way to draw "links" between words in such a way
that the local requirements of each word are satisfied, the links do
not cross, and the words form a consistent connected graph. The authors encoded
English grammar into such a system, and wrote \fBgrammar\-parse\fP to 
parse English using this grammar.
.PP
This package can be used for linguistic parsing for information
retrieval or extraction from natural language documents. Abiword also
uses it as a grammar checker.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-pp pp_knowledge_file
.TP
.B \-c constituent_knowledge_file
.TP
.B \-a affix_file
.TP
.B \-ppoff
.TP
.B \-coff
.TP
.B \-aoff
.TP
.B \-batch
.TP
.B \-<special "!" command> \"Can special commands be commandline arguments?
.SH USE
.PP
grammar\-parse, when invoked manually, will take control of the
terminal; grammar\-parse will then attempt to analyze the grammar of 
all input, unless escaped with an exclamation mark, according to the 
dictionary file provided as an argument. If escaped, the input
will be treated as a "special command"; "!help" lists all special
commands available.
.PP
grammar\-parse depends on a grammar\-parse dictionary which contains
lists of words and associated metadata about their grammatical
properties in order to analyze sentences. A grammar\-parse dictionary
provided by the authors of grammar\-parse is usually included with the 
grammar\-parse package, and can often be found somewhere in the
/usr/share/grammar\-parse/ hierarchy. When this is the case, only the 
two\-letter language code needs to be specified on the command\-line. 
Alternatively, a user can provide
their own dictionary as an argument, in which case the dictionary's 
directory should be specified. Hence, either of the commands
.TP
.B grammar\-parse en
.TP
.B grammar\-parse /usr/share/grammar\-parse/en
will run grammar\-parse using the english dictionary included with the 
parser.
.PP
While in a grammar\-parse session, some example output could be:
.PP
.RS
.B linkparser> Reading a man page is informative.
.PP
++++Time                                          0.00 seconds (0.01
total)
.PP
Found 1 linkage (1 had no P.P. violations)
  Unique linkage, cost vector = (UNUSED=0 DIS=0 AND=0 LEN=12)

    +------------------------Xp-----------------------+
    |         +---------Ss*g---------+                |
    |         +-------Os-------+     |                |
    |         |     +----Ds----+     |                |
    +----Wd---+     |   +--AN--+     +---Pa---+       |
    |         |     |   |      |     |        |       |
.PP
LEFT\-WALL reading.g a man.n page.n is.v informative.a . 
.RE
.PP
grammar\-parse can also be used non\-interactively, either through its
API, or via the \-batch option.  When used with the \-batch option,
grammar\-parse passively receives input from standard input, and when
the stream finishes, it then outputs its analysis. So one could
construct an ad\-hoc grammar checker by piping text through
grammar\-parse with a batch option, and seeing what sentences fail to
parse as valid:
.RS
.B cat thesis.txt | grammar\-parse /usr/share/grammar\-parse/en/4.0.dict \-batch
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.br
Information on the shared\-library API and the link types used in the 
parse is avavailable from the authors' website at 
.B http://www.link.cs.cmu.edu/link/dict/index.html.
.br
Peer\-reviewed papers explaining grammar\-parse can be found at the same 
site at
.B http://www.link.cs.cmu.edu/link/papers/index.html.
.SH AUTHOR
.nh
grammar\-parse was written by Daniel Sleator <sleator@cs.cmu.edu>, 
Davy Temperley <dtemp@theory.esm.rochester.edu>, and John Lafferty 
<lafferty@cs.cmu.edu>
.PP
This manual page was written by Ken Bloom <kbloom@gmail.com>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
