.\" Portability macros (not validated).
.\" FIXME: For some reason in man2html the registers are always null-strings.
.\" Also, in man2html the code doesn't display the <a> HTML code even
.\" if the conditionals are changed to always be true.
.
.\" Check whether we are using grohtml.
.nr mH 0
.if \n(.g \
.  if '\*(.T'html' \
.    nr mH 1
.
.\" Start URL.
.de UR
.  ds m1 \\$1\"
.  nh
.  if \\n(mH \{\
.    \" Start diversion in a new environment.
.    do ev URL-div
.    do di URL-div
.  \}
..
.
.
.\" End URL.
.de UE
.  ie \\n(mH \{\
.    br
.    di
.    ev
.
.    \" Has there been one or more input lines for the link text?
.    ie \\n(dn \{\
.      do HTML-NS "<a href=""\\*(m1"">"
.      \" Yes, strip off final newline of diversion and emit it.
.      do chop URL-div
.      do URL-div
\c
.      do HTML-NS </a>
.    \}
.    el \
.      do HTML-NS "<a href=""\\*(m1"">\\*(m1</a>"
\&\\$*\"
.  \}
.  el \
\\*(la\\*(m1\\*(ra\\$*\"
.
.  hy \\n(HY
..
.\" define .EX/.EE (for multiline user-command examples; normal Courier font)
.de EX
.Vb
.nf
.ft CW
..
.de EE
.Ve
.ft P
.fi
..
.\" =========================================================================
.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH LINK-GENERATOR 1 "2021-03-30" "Version 5.9.0"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
link\-generator \- generate natural language sentences using Link Grammar
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B link\-generator
.RB \-\-help
.br
.B link\-generator
.RB \-\-version
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invoke bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
\fBlink\-generator\fP is a command-line tool for generating random
sentences whose syntax is determined by the specified \%link\-grammar
dictionary.
.PP
.SH EXAMPLE
.EX
.B link\-generator
.EE
.PP
.SH BACKGROUND
The theory of Link Grammar is explained in many academic papers.
In the first of these, Daniel Sleator and Davy Temperley,
"Parsing English with a Link Grammar" (1991),
the authors defined a new formal grammatical system called a
"link grammar". A sequence of words is in the language of a link
grammar if there is a way to draw "links" between words in such a way
that the local requirements of each word are satisfied, the links do
not cross, and the words form a consistent connected graph. The authors
encoded English grammar into such a system, and wrote the
\%\fBlink\-parser\fP command-line tool to parse English using this grammar.
.PP
The engine that performs the parsing is separate from the dictionaries
describing a language.  Currently, the most fully developed, complete
dictionaries are for the English and Russian languages, although
experimental, incomplete dictionaries exist for German and eight
other languages.

.SH OVERVIEW
.PP
\fBlink\-generator\fP generates sentences.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print program version and configuration details, and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-usage
Print a short synopsis of the option flags.
.TP
.B \-l\fR language|dict_location, \fB\-\-language\fR=language|dict_location
Specify the language to use, or the directory file-path to the
dictionary to use.
.TP
.B \-s\fR length, \fB\-\-length\fR=length
If \fBlength\fR is 0, read a sentence template. It may consist of fully
spelled-out words as well as wild-cards. The wild-card \fB\\*\fR represents any
dictionary word. Wild-card specifications like \fIprefix\fR\fB\\*\fR and
\fB\\*.n\fR are also recognized.

Otherwise, it specifies the length of the sentences to generate. All generated
sentences will have exactly this length.

.TP
.B \-c\fR count, \fB\-\-count\fR=count
Specify the number of sentences to generate. If this number is less
than the number of possible linkages, then a random subset of possible
linkages will be generated, and one representative sentence for each
linkage will be printed. The words in the representative sentence are
randomly chosen from the set of words associated with each disjunct
in that linkage. If the count is greater than the number of possible
linkages, then one representative sentence for each linkage will be
printed.

If the \-x option is set, and if the count is greater than the number
of possible linkages, then more than one representative sentence will
be printed for each linkage. Each sentence will consist of word choices
drawn randomly from the set of words associated with each disjunct.
An approximately equal number of sentences will be printed for each
linkage; if the count is high enough, then all possible word-choices
will be printed. Note that this typically results in a combinatorial
explosion!

.TP
.B \-x\fR, \fB\-\-explode\fR
If set, and is the count is greater than the number of possible
linkages, then more than one sentence will be printed for each
linkage. Each sentence will have a distinct random word-choice for
that linkage.

.TP
.B \-d\fR, \fB\-\-disjuncts\fR
Display linkage disjuncts.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-walls\fR
Don't attach to walls in wildcard words.

.TP
.B \-r\fR, \fB\-\-random\fR
Use unrepeatable random numbers.

.TP
.B \-u\fR, \fB\-\-unused\fR
Display unused disjuncts.

.SH SEE ALSO
.nh
The \%link\-parser is a command-line tool for parsing sentences. It
provides some additional information about the \%link\-grammar
implementation.
.PP
Information on the \%link\-grammar shared-library API and the link types
used in the parse is available at the
.UR https://opencog.github.io/link-grammar-website/
Link Grammar website
.UE .
.PP
Peer-reviewed papers explaining Link Grammar can be found at
.UR http://www.link.cs.cmu.edu/link/papers
original CMU site
.UE .
.PP
The source code of \%\fBlink\-generator\fP and the \%link\-grammar library is
located at
.UR https://github.com/opencog/link-grammar
GitHub
.UE .
.PP
The mailing list for Link Grammar discussion is at
.UR http://groups.google.com/group/link-grammar?hl=en
link-grammar Google group
.UE .
.SH AUTHOR
.nh
The \%link\-grammar library were written by Daniel Sleator
<sleator@cs.cmu.edu>, Davy Temperley <dtemp@theory.esm.rochester.edu>,
and John Lafferty <lafferty@cs.cmu.edu>. The \%link\-generator tool
was created by Amir Plivatsky <amirpli_at_gmail.com>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Ken Bloom <kbloom@gmail.com>, for the
Debian project, and updated Linas Vepstas <linasvepstas@gmail.com>.
